# Community in Quarantine

As (Un)Silencing Slavery came closer to its launch date, I decided to ensure that the data on the enslaved persons was appropriately translated between the spreadsheet Prof. Celia E. Naylor provided and the website itself. This check involved looking for anomalies, like the peculiar fact that 24 (out of 152) of the enslaved persons included in the 1817 register had their age listed as 40, a nice round number. I noticed something else as well, which I posed as a question to my colleagues Alex Gil and Madiha Zahrah Choksi: “How many of the people in our data set were not included in the final register in 1832?” In other words, how many people had passed away, effectively, over the fourteen-year recorded history of this project. In short, both colleagues underguessed, and so would have I. Out of 208 people in the records, 90 had their deaths recorded between 1817 and 1832, a mortality rate approaching 50 percent. I tried to imagine a cohort of 200 people, and then I tried to imagine half of those people gone forever within fourteen years. It’s a level of community destruction that’s hard to envision. This is beyond “decimation,” which [etymologically means only removing one in ten people](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decimate). Saying, then, that this community and the expanded kinship relations at Rose Hall was “decimated” by the slavocracy is quite literally _an understatement_.

Those 90 deaths, that formal mortality rate of 43 percent, I bring up for two specific reasons. The first pertains to the importance of moving between quantitative and qualitative analysis, what can be called in short-hand as “[mixed methods research](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multimethodology).” The second pertains to the tireless work of community building, even in the face of external forces aligned against allowing communities to thrive.

Approaching works of humanistic research from a position of active engagement with the goals and epistemology surrounding mixed methods research has been important to me for years.[^mixed-methods-in-dh] With (Un)Silencing Slavery, we as a team were presented with a brilliant mixed methodological dilemma. What do we do with the nature of the archival material we have, and how do we build an intellectual groundwork in line with Prof. Naylor’s goals of telling the truths about Rose Hall that are obscured or even deleted by the tourism-friendly narratives surrounding the site in 2022? Prof. Naylor took what could be considered a quantitative set of data and built a qualitative world around it that could resemble or call to memory the qualitative worlds of the people represented as “mere” lines on a spreadsheet, composed over the course of fourteen years. 

In fact, Prof. Naylor built a qualitative world twice over, once for _(Un)Silencing Slavery_ the book, and once again, with Monique J. S. Williams, with the personalized profiles that accompany each of the 208 persons commemorated on this website. Initially, those profiles were to be automatically generated based on the data Prof. Naylor had taken from the registers and collated into a spreadsheet, but the result was cold and dehumanizing: “[Name] was born in [birth year]. They left Rose Hall in [year of departure]. They were classified racially as [colour] and as [nativity] in origin. Their mother was [mother].” And so on. The new profiles inject more of the humanity that we wanted to capture through qualitative representation, yet they also indicate the radical unknowability of the breadth and depth of these lives lived because of the strictly and actively inhumanly quantitative way in which their lives were recorded. Prof. Naylor and Williams’s repeated lines in the profiles of not knowing who the fathers of children were, or what the larger familial relationships the people shared underscores again the central mixed methodological conflict inherent in the project: how can we (qualitatively) “remember and hold space” for those who “lived and labored at Rose Hall Plantation” when all we have is a spreadsheet?

When Choksi and Gil brought me in to meet Prof. Naylor and begin working on the project, the latter had an image already sketched out of a way to reframe the quantitative and categorical nature of the archival material into a visualization that upset how we are used to seeing quantitative and categorical information represented visually. 

In the sketch for the website, central was the image of the “Community Tree,” a circular device that would help represent the kinship relations at Rose Hall as best as they could be reconstructed. But the circular design did more than just that. The circle could very easily be unrolled into a standard bar chart, with the people named along the _x_-axis and the years 1817–1832 as the _y_-axis. Presented that way, the people are isolated from one another; a viewer has to traverse the entire visualization in order to see how the leftmost person is connected to the rightmost. Presented circularly, the people are all effectively equidistant from one another, cut through the center of the circle. So even if the angular distance between two people is large, the two petals intersect, even if only by extrapolation, in the center of the circle.

Furthermore, the circle allows us the fiction/fantasy of shared lives before 1817. Since the mathematical center of the circle corresponds to the year 1814, people born before them have their petals intersecting as they reach into the past, even if that past is literally whited-out in the visualization to demonstrate our current inability to know what came before. In contrast, on the outer edge, we see potential lives escaping in every direction and enlarging the various worlds the people enslaved at Rose Hall built. That could be a naively optimistic view, but given the occasion of Emancipendence that prompts the launch of this site, it is also a remark on the ability to persist in creating these worlds.

While in no way comparable to the horror endured by the 208 enslaved people remembered here, the times in which this project grew to its current form also challenged and disrupted the worlds we had built or were trying to build. Some of the examples are related directly, such as the attention given to members of the African diaspora who continue to suffer under various regimes of oppression, an attention that intensified in 2020, just as this project was reconstituting its own communal shape. That is, we cannot talk about this project without also remarking on how it helped maintain a much smaller community upset by the COVID-19 pandemic. In February 2020, we were meeting every Friday in person, slowly going over the technical demands of this project, as part of the larger world of scholars making up the [Columbia University Libraries Studio](https://studio.cul.columbia.edu/). Then suddenly we were all separated and isolated from each other. More notably, some of us took up projects [directly addressing the threat of the pandemic to our other, larger communities](https://studio.cul.columbia.edu/2020/03/21/studio-librarians-face-shields/). But at the end of 2020, as Gil put it so eloquently, “We miss the social life that we fostered around our collaborative research and learning.”[^studio-remote]

Gil’s idea to start streaming our working on (Un)Silencing Slavery helped refocus or reestablish a shattered world in the Studio, and it had the knock-on effect of reengaging (at least me) with other communities I had neglected. While our streams have never been particularly popular, they did bring me into closer contact with, for example, the people maintaining [Ember](https://www.emberjs.com), the JavaScript framework underlying this website.






[^studio-remote]: Alex Gil, “Announcing Studio Remote,” Columbia University Libraries Studio, October 13, 2020, https://studio.cul.columbia.edu/2020/10/13/studio-remote-launch/.

[^mixed-methods-in-dh]: See, for example, how I formalize these concerns into a call for treating the field of “digital humanities” as always already mixed methodological, to its benefit, in Moacir P. de Sá Pereira, “Mixed Methodological Digital Humanities,” in _Debates in the Digital Humanities 2019_, ed. Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F. Klein (Minneapolis, MN ; London: University of Minnesota Press, 2019), https://doi.org/10.5749/j.ctvg251hk.37.
